Failure Strategy in Distributed Systems
========================================
How to handle failure, use observability to detect and diagnose it,
read service maps, and survive catastrophic events.


---
WHY DISTRIBUTED SYSTEMS FAIL DIFFERENTLY
---

In a monolith, failure is binary: the process is up or it is down.
In a distributed system, failure is partial, progressive, and sneaky.

  - Service A is healthy. Service B is degraded. A calls B.
    A looks fine. Users see slow responses. No red light anywhere.

  - A database query starts taking 3s instead of 50ms.
    Connection pools fill up. Threads block. Memory grows.
    The service looks "up" but is effectively dead under load.

  - A downstream payment gateway starts returning 429 (rate limited).
    Without a circuit breaker, every user request hits that gateway,
    gets a 429, and your service turns that into a 500.

  - A deployment rolls out to 10% of pods. The new version has a memory leak.
    Metrics look fine on average. The 10% of users on new pods are suffering.

Partial failure is the normal state in production at scale.
The goal is not to prevent all failure. It is to contain it,
detect it fast, respond gracefully, and recover automatically.


---
THE FOUR CATEGORIES OF FAILURE
---

1. TRANSIENT FAILURE
   Definition: temporary, self-resolving.
   Examples: brief network packet loss, momentary timeout,
             a pod restarting, a DNS blip.
   Strategy: retry with exponential backoff + jitter. Most go away.

2. DEPENDENCY FAILURE
   Definition: a downstream service or database is degraded or down.
   Examples: payment gateway down, auth service slow, database overloaded.
   Strategy: circuit breaker, fallback, graceful degradation.

3. OVERLOAD / SATURATION
   Definition: a service receives more load than it can handle.
   Examples: traffic spike, chatty client retry storm, fan-out amplification.
   Strategy: rate limiting, load shedding, backpressure, autoscaling.

4. CATASTROPHIC FAILURE
   Definition: a large portion of the system is unavailable.
   Examples: region outage, data corruption event, mass pod eviction,
             a bad deployment that kills all replicas simultaneously,
             a cascading failure that propagates across the system.
   Strategy: runbook-driven incident response, failover, disaster recovery,
             bulkhead isolation to stop blast radius.


---
FAILURE HANDLING PATTERNS
---

RETRY WITH EXPONENTIAL BACKOFF + JITTER
  The most basic pattern. Retry transient failures.
  Exponential backoff: wait 1s, 2s, 4s, 8s between retries.
  Jitter: add randomness to prevent retry storms (all clients
  retrying at exactly the same second makes the problem worse).

  When to retry:    network timeout, 429 (rate limited), 503 (unavailable)
  When NOT to retry: 400 (bad request), 401 (unauthorized), 404 (not found)
                     409 (conflict), any non-idempotent operation

  Max retries: 3 is typical. More than that and you are adding load
  to an already stressed system.

  AWS SDK and most HTTP clients have built-in retry + jitter.
  Always configure max_attempts and base_delay explicitly.


CIRCUIT BREAKER
  Prevents cascading failure when a downstream service is degraded.

  Three states:
    CLOSED   - normal, requests flow through
    OPEN     - downstream is failing, all requests fail fast (no call made)
    HALF-OPEN - probe state, let one request through to test recovery

  Thresholds (example):
    Open the circuit if error_rate > 50% in the last 10 seconds
    or if latency_p95 > 2x baseline for 30 seconds.

  Why it matters:
    Without a circuit breaker: every user request waits for the 30s timeout
    on the downstream call. Connection pool fills up. Thread pool exhausts.
    Your service is now also down.

    With a circuit breaker: after the threshold trips, requests fail fast
    in <1ms. Resources are freed. Upstream stays healthy.
    The circuit probes recovery automatically.

  Implementation: Resilience4j (Java), pybreaker (Python),
  go-resilience (Go), or service mesh (Istio, Linkerd) for language-agnostic.


BULKHEAD
  Isolate resources so one failing component cannot exhaust shared resources.

  Concept comes from ship design: compartmentalize the hull so one breach
  does not sink the whole ship.

  Examples:
    - Separate thread pools for each downstream dependency.
      Payment gateway gets its own pool (10 threads).
      Auth service gets its own pool (20 threads).
      If payment hangs, only the payment pool fills up.
      Auth and all other calls continue normally.

    - Separate Kubernetes namespaces or node pools per criticality tier.
      Tier-1 (payment, auth): dedicated nodes with resource guarantees.
      Tier-2 (reporting, notifications): shared nodes with lower priority.
      Tier-1 pods cannot be evicted by Tier-2 workload spikes.

    - Separate connection pools per database.
      The analytics query that takes 60s cannot consume the
      connection pool used by the transactional write path.


TIMEOUT
  Every network call must have an explicit timeout. No exceptions.
  Without timeouts, a single slow dependency hangs your threads forever.

  Timeout hierarchy: set tighter timeouts closer to the user.
    API Gateway: 30s max
    Service-to-service: 5s
    Database query: 1s (fast queries), 10s (batch queries, separate pool)
    External API: 3s with 2 retries

  Timeout budget: the downstream timeout must always be less than
  the upstream timeout minus the work your service does.
    User -> A (timeout 10s) -> B (timeout 8s) -> C (timeout 6s)
  If C takes 6s, B waits 6s, A sees 8s, user sees close to 10s.
  If timeouts are not staggered, A times out before B does, and B's
  retry keeps running after A already gave up.


RATE LIMITING AND LOAD SHEDDING
  Rate limiting: cap the number of requests a client can send.
    Per user, per IP, per API key, per service.
    Return 429 with Retry-After header when the limit is hit.
    Protects downstream services from noisy neighbors.

  Load shedding: when the system is overloaded, actively drop
  lower-priority work to protect higher-priority work.
    Example: during a traffic spike, continue processing payments
    but drop analytics events and defer notification emails.
    Return 503 with a message. Let the client retry later.

  Priority queues: assign work to queues by business priority.
    Queue A: real-time payment (process immediately)
    Queue B: fraud check (process within 1s)
    Queue C: batch report generation (process within 1 hour)
    Under load, Queue C is paused first. Queue A is never touched.


GRACEFUL DEGRADATION
  When a dependency is unavailable, return a degraded but useful response
  instead of an error.

  Examples:
    - Product page: recommendations service is down.
      Return the page without recommendations instead of returning 500.

    - Loan application: credit bureau API is down.
      Queue the application for manual review instead of failing the submission.

    - Feature flag service is unreachable.
      Fall back to the default feature state (feature off) instead of crashing.

  The contract: tell the user what is limited and why.
  Do not silently return incomplete data and pretend it is complete.


IDEMPOTENCY
  Design all write operations to be safe to retry.
  A request is idempotent if calling it multiple times has the same
  effect as calling it once.

  How: the client generates a unique idempotency_key for each logical
  operation. The server stores the result the first time.
  On retry with the same key, return the stored result immediately
  without re-executing the operation.

  Payments, order creation, and anything with money must be idempotent.
  Without this: a timeout + retry creates a duplicate charge.


BACKPRESSURE
  When a consumer is processing slower than a producer is sending,
  the producer must slow down. This is backpressure.

  Without backpressure: queues grow unbounded, memory exhausts,
  the consumer crashes, messages are lost.

  Mechanisms:
    - Queue depth limit: reject new messages when queue > N items
    - Flow control: consumer sends explicit "slow down" signals to producer
    - Async / message queue: SQS, Kafka provide natural buffering
      and allow consumers to scale independently of producers


---
HOW OBSERVABILITY HELPS WITH FAILURE
---

Observability does not prevent failure. It tells you:
  1. Something is wrong (alerting)
  2. Where it is wrong (service map + traces)
  3. What is wrong (logs + trace attributes)
  4. How bad it is (metrics)
  5. When it started (metric history, deployment markers)
  6. Whether the fix worked (metrics after the change)

THE DETECTION CHAIN

  Failure starts: a downstream database starts returning slow queries.

  Metrics detect it first (seconds):
    - db_query_duration_p99 crosses alert threshold
    - CloudWatch alarm fires: p99 > 1s for 2 consecutive minutes
    - PagerDuty notifies on-call engineer

  Traces show scope (seconds to minutes):
    - Engineer opens X-Ray service map
    - loan-service -> postgres span is red and wide
    - All other spans in the trace are green and fast
    - The problem is isolated to the postgres SELECT call

  Logs confirm the cause (minutes):
    - Engineer queries CloudWatch Logs Insights:
        fields @timestamp, @message
        | filter service = "loan-service" and level = "ERROR"
        | filter @timestamp > 1h ago
        | limit 50
    - Sees: "connection pool exhausted" and "query timeout"
    - Correlates with a recent deployment marker on the metrics graph

  Metrics confirm impact (minutes):
    - error_rate for loan-service jumped from 0.1% to 18% at the same time
    - active_connections on the RDS instance is at 99% of max
    - Deployment happened 22 minutes ago

  Resolution is now targeted:
    - Not: "something is wrong, restart everything"
    - But: "the new deployment has a query that hits the full table,
            it runs on every user request, it is exhausting the connection pool"

Without observability the same incident takes hours and requires
guessing across multiple services and log files.


USING TRACES TO FIND THE BLAST RADIUS

  When an alert fires, the first question is: how many services are affected?
  Traces answer this without reading logs in every service.

  In X-Ray service map or Grafana Tempo:
    - Red nodes = services with elevated error rate
    - Wide spans = services with elevated latency
    - Arrow direction = dependency direction (who calls whom)

  You can immediately see:
    - payment-service is red (error rate 40%)
    - auth-service is green (healthy)
    - loan-service is orange (latency elevated, errors low)
    - notification-service is grey (no traffic, no traces)

  This tells you: payment-service is the origin. loan-service is affected
  because it depends on payment-service and is hitting its circuit breaker.
  auth-service and notification-service are isolated from the failure.

  Blast radius = payment-service + loan-service.
  Everything else is fine. You do not need to look at those other services.


USING LOG CORRELATION DURING AN INCIDENT

  During an incident, you need to answer: what is the error and who is affected?

  Structured logs + trace_id let you do this in seconds:

  Step 1 - Find the error pattern:
    CloudWatch Logs Insights:
      fields @timestamp, trace_id, user_id, error, @message
      | filter level = "ERROR"
      | filter @timestamp > 30min ago
      | stats count() by error
      | sort by count desc

  Step 2 - Find the affected users:
      fields user_id
      | filter error = "connection pool exhausted"
      | filter @timestamp > 30min ago
      | stats count() by user_id
      | sort by count desc

  Step 3 - Pick one trace_id from the error logs:
    Jump to X-Ray -> paste the trace_id -> see the full waterfall
    for that exact request. See which span failed and what the
    attributes were (loan_id, amount, query text).

  You now have: error type, affected user count, root cause span,
  and full context — in under 5 minutes.


---
SERVICE MAPPING
---

A service map is a live, auto-generated dependency graph.
Every node is a service. Every edge is a call between services.
Color indicates health. Width or thickness indicates latency or volume.

Reading a service map:
  Green node    = healthy, error rate and latency within normal range
  Yellow node   = degraded, elevated latency or low error rate
  Red node      = failing, high error rate or very high latency
  Arrow         = call direction (A -> B means A calls B)
  Arrow label   = call volume (req/s) and error rate on that edge
  Node size     = call volume (bigger = more traffic)

Where to find it:
  AWS X-Ray     -> Service Map (auto-generated from traces)
  GCP           -> Cloud Trace service graph
  Grafana Tempo -> Service Graph panel
  Datadog       -> Service Catalog + Service Map
  Dynatrace     -> Smartscape (auto-detected, very detailed)
  Istio         -> Kiali service mesh visualizer

How to use a service map during an incident:

  1. Find the red or orange node. That is where errors are generated.
  2. Look at its upstream callers (arrows pointing TO it).
     They are affected by this failure but are not the cause.
  3. Look at its downstream dependencies (arrows pointing FROM it).
     Did the failure come from one of those?
  4. Click the red node to see its error rate, latency distribution,
     and a sample of failing traces.
  5. Click the edge between two services to see the error rate
     and latency specifically on that call path.

Common patterns on service maps:

  Single red node, all callers turning yellow:
    One service is down. Its callers are degraded because they
    depend on it. Fix the red node. Yellow nodes self-recover.

  Cascading red starting from a leaf node:
    A downstream dependency (database, external API) is failing.
    Everything that depends on it turns red in sequence.
    Fix the root leaf. If circuit breakers are in place, only the
    immediate callers are red. If not, cascading red means no
    circuit breakers — that is also a finding.

  One red edge between two green nodes:
    A specific call path is failing (e.g. loan-service -> credit-bureau).
    Both services are healthy overall. The issue is in the integration
    (auth, protocol mismatch, schema change, network policy).

  All nodes turning red simultaneously:
    Likely a shared dependency (database, service mesh, DNS, load balancer)
    or a deployment that went out to all pods at once.
    Check the timeline against recent deployments.
    Check shared infrastructure health (RDS, Redis, ELB).

Building a service dependency map for design:
  Beyond runtime service maps, maintain a static dependency map:
    - What services does my service call?
    - What services call my service?
    - Which dependencies are sync (required for the request to succeed)?
    - Which are async (failure can be buffered)?
    - What is the SLA of each dependency?

  This map determines your failure blast radius before anything goes wrong.
  If payment-service (SLA 99.9%) depends on fraud-service (SLA 99.5%),
  then payment-service can never achieve better than 99.5% end-to-end.
  You design circuit breakers and fallbacks based on this map.


---
CATASTROPHIC FAILURE
---

Definition: a failure that affects a large portion of the system
simultaneously, is not self-resolving, and requires coordinated
human response.

Examples:
  - Cloud region outage (AWS us-east-1 degraded, 2021, 2023)
  - Database corruption or accidental bulk delete
  - A bad deployment that kills all pods simultaneously
    (rollout strategy not set, or maxUnavailable=100%)
  - A cascading failure where circuit breakers were not in place
    and one slow service caused all upstream services to hang
  - Runaway autoscaler consuming all cloud quota
  - A DDoS attack consuming all ingress bandwidth
  - Security incident: mass secret rotation breaks all services at once

The difference from normal failure: scope and coordination.
One service failing = incident. Half the system failing = major incident.
The failure handling playbook is different.


BLAST RADIUS CONTAINMENT (before catastrophic failure happens)

  Goal: design the system so that any single failure can only
  affect a bounded portion of users and services.

  Techniques:

  Availability zones and multi-region:
    Deploy across 3 AZs minimum. Route traffic across all three.
    If one AZ has an outage, traffic routes to the other two.
    For mission-critical: active-active multi-region (two regions
    both serve live traffic with data replication between them).

  Deployment rings:
    Deploy to 1% of pods (canary). Observe metrics for 10 minutes.
    Deploy to 10%. Observe. Deploy to 50%. Observe. Then 100%.
    A bad deployment kills 1% of users, not all of them.
    Automatic rollback: if error_rate > threshold during rollout, stop and revert.

  Feature flags:
    New code ships with a feature flag set to OFF.
    Enable for internal users first. Then 1%. Then 10%. Then all.
    Catastrophic failure from a new feature: flip the flag off.
    Recovery time: seconds. No deployment, no rollback required.

  Pod disruption budgets (Kubernetes):
    Define: always keep at least 2 replicas of this service running.
    Prevents Kubernetes cluster maintenance from evicting all pods at once.

  maxUnavailable and maxSurge in rollout strategy:
    Never set maxUnavailable=100%. That kills all pods simultaneously.
    Standard: maxUnavailable=25%, maxSurge=25%.
    Guarantees 75% of pods stay running during a rolling update.

  Timeouts and circuit breakers everywhere:
    Without these, one slow service can cause every service
    that calls it to exhaust threads and become unavailable.
    This is how one database slowdown becomes a full system outage.


INCIDENT RESPONSE DURING CATASTROPHIC FAILURE

  The standard: SEV1 / P1 incident response process.

  Immediate actions (first 5 minutes):
    1. Declare the incident. Open an incident channel (Slack, Teams).
       One person is Incident Commander (IC). One is the Scribe.
       IC coordinates. Scribe documents. Engineers investigate.
       Do NOT have everyone investigating independently in silence.

    2. Assess scope. Open the service map. How many services are red?
       How many users are affected? What is the error rate?
       Answer: "What is broken and how many people are feeling it?"

    3. Communicate immediately to stakeholders.
       Brief, factual: "We are aware of elevated errors on loan processing.
       We are investigating. Updates every 10 minutes."
       Do not wait for a root cause before communicating.

    4. Check the deployment timeline.
       Did anything change in the last 30-60 minutes?
       Deployment, configuration change, database migration, certificate rotation?
       Most catastrophic failures in production are caused by changes.

    5. Stop the bleeding before diagnosing.
       If a bad deployment is confirmed: rollback immediately.
       Do not try to forward-fix a catastrophic failure in production.
       Roll back first. Diagnose in a staging environment later.

  Investigation (minutes 5-30):
    Service map: identify the red nodes and the dependency direction.
    Traces: find the failing request and the failing span.
    Logs: find the error message and the first occurrence timestamp.
    Metrics: confirm the timeline. When did it start? What changed then?
    CloudTrail / audit logs: what API calls or changes happened at that time?

  Recovery options:
    Rollback          - revert to the previous working deployment
    Feature flag off  - disable the specific feature that is failing
    Traffic shift     - route traffic to another region or AZ
    Scale out         - add capacity if the issue is overload
    Restart           - last resort for memory leaks or stuck processes
    Failover          - promote a read replica to primary if DB is corrupted

  After recovery:
    Write a postmortem (also called incident review or blameless retrospective).
    The postmortem is not about finding who to blame.
    It is about finding the systemic weaknesses that allowed the failure.

    Postmortem structure:
      What happened (timeline of events, factual)
      Impact (duration, users affected, revenue impact if known)
      Root cause (the underlying technical reason)
      Contributing factors (what made it worse than it needed to be)
      Detection (how long from failure start to detection)
      Response (how long from detection to mitigation)
      Action items (specific changes to prevent recurrence)

    Common action items from catastrophic failure postmortems:
      - Add circuit breakers to the dependency that caused the cascade
      - Change rollout strategy from maxUnavailable=100% to 25%
      - Add an alert for the metric that was moving for 20 minutes before anyone noticed
      - Set an explicit timeout that was missing on the slow downstream call
      - Add a canary stage to the deployment pipeline
      - Create a runbook for this failure mode so the next responder is faster


CHAOS ENGINEERING

  The proactive approach to catastrophic failure.
  Deliberately inject failures into production (or staging) in a
  controlled way to find weaknesses before customers do.

  Types of chaos experiments:
    Kill a pod randomly                 - does the service stay healthy?
    Kill all pods in one AZ             - does traffic route to other AZs?
    Add 500ms latency on a service call - does the circuit breaker open?
    Return 500 errors from a dependency - does the fallback work?
    Fill up disk on a node              - does the service degrade gracefully?
    Saturate CPU on a node              - do pods reschedule to healthy nodes?

  Framework: Netflix Chaos Monkey (original), AWS Fault Injection Simulator,
  Gremlin, LitmusChaos (CNCF, Kubernetes-native).

  The rule: always run chaos experiments with a hypothesis.
    Hypothesis: "If the auth-service is unavailable for 30 seconds,
    the loan-service will return cached tokens and degrade gracefully
    without exceeding 1% error rate."
    Run it. Measure. Either the hypothesis holds (confidence gained)
    or it does not (weakness found and fixed before a real outage).

  Chaos engineering makes catastrophic failure boring because you
  have already seen it and fixed the weaknesses in a controlled setting.


---
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER: FAILURE LIFECYCLE
---

BEFORE FAILURE (design):
  - Draw the dependency map. Know the blast radius of each service.
  - Add circuit breakers on every synchronous downstream call.
  - Set explicit timeouts at every boundary.
  - Design for graceful degradation (what does the service return when X fails?).
  - Write runbooks for the three most likely failure modes of each service.
  - Implement deployment rings (canary -> 10% -> 50% -> 100%).
  - Add feature flags for new functionality.
  - Set pod disruption budgets and correct rollout strategy.
  - Run chaos experiments to validate the assumptions.

DETECTION (observability):
  - Metrics alert fires. Golden Signals: latency, traffic, errors, saturation.
  - SLO burn rate alert fires (more precise than raw metric alerts).
  - Synthetic monitoring detects user-facing failure from outside the system.

DIAGNOSIS (observability):
  - Service map shows which nodes are red and the direction of failure.
  - Traces show which span is the root cause.
  - Logs confirm the error message and first occurrence time.
  - Deployment timeline: correlate with recent changes.

MITIGATION (runbook-driven):
  - Rollback if a deployment caused it.
  - Flip a feature flag if a feature caused it.
  - Scale out if overload caused it.
  - Fail over if infrastructure caused it.
  - Communicate at every step.

RECOVERY (verify with observability):
  - Error rate returns to baseline on metrics.
  - Service map returns to all green.
  - Traces show normal latency distribution.
  - Confirm with synthetic monitoring from outside the system.

LEARNING (postmortem):
  - Timeline and root cause documented.
  - Detection gap: how long before the alert fired?
  - Response gap: how long from alert to mitigation?
  - Action items with owners and deadlines.
  - Close the gap before the next failure.


---
KEY INTERVIEW POINTS
---

Q: How do you handle a cascading failure?
   Circuit breakers on every downstream call. When a downstream service
   is failing, the circuit opens and requests fail fast (no thread blocking).
   This prevents the failure from propagating to all upstream services.
   Bulkheads ensure one dependency's thread pool cannot starve another.
   Timeouts ensure no call blocks indefinitely.

Q: What is the difference between a circuit breaker and a retry?
   Retry is for transient failure. Try again in case it was a blip.
   Circuit breaker is for sustained failure. Stop trying for now
   so you do not make things worse. They work together:
   retry within a closed circuit breaker, fail fast on an open one.

Q: How would you detect a failure before your users do?
   Synthetic monitoring: scripted transactions that run from outside
   the system every minute, simulating real user flows.
   If a synthetic test fails, you know before any real user hits the error.
   SLO burn rate alerting catches growing degradation before it
   becomes an outage.

Q: What is a service map and how do you use it in an incident?
   A service map is an auto-generated graph of services and their
   runtime dependencies, colored by health. During an incident:
   find the red node, determine if it is the cause or a victim,
   look at the direction of arrows to understand which services are
   upstream (affected) vs downstream (root cause candidates).
   Trace into the red service to confirm the failing span.

Q: What is chaos engineering and why would you do it?
   Deliberately injecting failures in a controlled way to find
   systemic weaknesses before real failures do.
   It validates that circuit breakers actually open, fallbacks actually
   work, and alerts actually fire. It converts catastrophic surprises
   into boring expected events because you have already seen them.

Q: What goes in a postmortem?
   Timeline (factual), impact (users affected, duration),
   root cause (the technical reason), contributing factors
   (what made it worse), detection gap, response gap,
   and specific action items with owners.
   A postmortem is blameless. The goal is systemic improvement,
   not individual accountability.

Q: How do you limit blast radius during a deployment?
   Deployment rings: canary (1%) -> 10% -> 50% -> 100%.
   Automatic rollback on error rate threshold.
   Feature flags for new features (independent of deployment).
   Pod disruption budgets and maxUnavailable limits in rollout strategy.
   Multi-AZ / multi-region so an AZ-level failure only hits a fraction.
