Temporal.io — Is It a Workflow Agent?
=======================================
Short answer: No. Temporal is a durable workflow engine, not an agent.
But it is one of the best infrastructure layers you can run an agent ON TOP of.
This write-up explains what Temporal is, how it works, how it differs
from an agent, and how the two combine in production AI systems.


---
WHAT TEMPORAL IS
---

Temporal is an open-source durable execution platform.

It lets you write long-running, fault-tolerant workflows in normal
application code (Go, Java, Python, TypeScript, PHP, .NET).

The core guarantee: if your workflow is interrupted — server crash,
network failure, pod eviction, deployment restart — Temporal replays
the workflow from where it left off. Automatically. Without you
writing any checkpoint or recovery code.

That single guarantee changes what you can build.

Without Temporal:
  A multi-step process (call API, wait for human approval, update database,
  send notification) requires: a job queue, a database for state,
  a scheduler for retries, a separate process for each step,
  and custom recovery code for every failure mode.

With Temporal:
  Write it as a single Python or Go function. Temporal handles
  durability, retries, timeouts, and recovery.


---
THE CORE CONCEPTS
---

WORKFLOW
  A Python/Go/Java function that defines the sequence of steps.
  It runs durably — it can pause for hours, days, or months
  (waiting for a human, waiting for an event) and resume exactly
  where it stopped. No state is lost between steps.

  The workflow function itself must be deterministic.
  It cannot do I/O directly (no HTTP calls, no DB queries, no sleep).
  All I/O happens inside Activities.

ACTIVITY
  A plain function that does the actual work: call an API, query a database,
  send an email, call an LLM, process a file.
  Activities can fail and are retried by Temporal automatically.
  You configure: max_attempts, initial_interval, backoff_coefficient, max_interval.
  Activities are where non-deterministic and side-effectful code lives.

WORKER
  A process your team runs that hosts Workflow and Activity implementations.
  Workers poll Temporal Server for tasks. Temporal assigns tasks to workers.
  Scale workers independently. Zero workers = tasks queue up and resume
  when workers come back. No work is lost.

TEMPORAL SERVER
  The orchestration engine. Stores workflow state, dispatches tasks to workers,
  handles timers, tracks retries. Can be self-hosted (Docker/Kubernetes) or
  used as Temporal Cloud (managed SaaS).

TASK QUEUE
  Workflows and Activities are dispatched via named task queues.
  Workers subscribe to queues. Multiple worker instances on the same queue
  = horizontal scaling. Different queues for different workload types.

SIGNALS
  External events sent to a running workflow. The workflow can wait for
  a signal (human approval, webhook from an external system) for any duration.
  Signal arrives -> workflow resumes from the exact point where it was waiting.

QUERIES
  Read the current state of a running workflow without affecting it.
  A workflow can expose a query handler that returns its current status.

TIMERS
  A workflow can sleep for any duration (seconds to months) with zero cost.
  The timer is durable — a server restart does not lose the timer.
  Use case: reminder email 7 days after a user signs up.
  The workflow sleeps for 7 days. Temporal fires it exactly when needed.

CHILD WORKFLOWS
  A workflow can spawn other workflows as children.
  Fan out work: process 1000 items by launching 1000 child workflows in parallel.
  Each child is independently durable.

SAGAS / COMPENSATIONS
  Temporal makes it straightforward to implement the Saga pattern:
  a sequence of steps where each step has a compensating action if a
  later step fails. Distributed transaction without a distributed lock.

  Example: book flight, book hotel, charge card.
  If charge card fails: cancel hotel booking, cancel flight booking.
  Each compensation is an Activity. Temporal retries them to ensure
  they eventually succeed.


---
WHY TEMPORAL IS NOT AN AGENT
---

An AI agent:
  - Has reasoning capability (an LLM decides what to do next)
  - Observes its environment (tools return results, context accumulates)
  - Takes actions (calls tools, invokes APIs)
  - Adapts its plan based on intermediate results
  - May loop or backtrack based on what it learns

Temporal:
  - Has no reasoning capability (it does not decide what to do next)
  - Executes a plan defined by YOU in code
  - The sequence of steps is deterministic and pre-written
  - It does not adapt based on results — unless you write that logic
  - It cannot look at a tool result and decide to call a different tool

The distinction:

  AGENT         The LLM reads the result of step 3 and decides to call
                tool A instead of tool B, or to loop back, or to stop.
                The plan is dynamic. The LLM is the decision maker.

  TEMPORAL      You wrote: step 1, step 2, step 3, step 4.
                Temporal executes exactly that. Durably. With retries.
                If step 2 fails it retries step 2. It does not reconsider
                whether step 2 was even the right step.

Temporal is infrastructure. An agent is intelligence.
Temporal orchestrates Activities. An agent reasons about what to do.

The confusion arises because:
  1. Both involve multi-step processes.
  2. Both can call external tools or APIs.
  3. Temporal Workflow code looks superficially like agent planning.
  4. Marketing around "agentic workflows" has blurred the terminology.

But the decision-making locus is completely different.
Temporal executes your predetermined logic reliably.
An agent figures out its own logic at runtime using an LLM.


---
WHAT TEMPORAL IS GREAT AT THAT AGENTS ARE NOT
---

DETERMINISTIC MULTI-STEP PROCESSES
  Loan origination: collect documents, run credit check, run fraud check,
  get underwriter approval, disburse funds, send confirmation.
  The steps are always the same. The order is always the same.
  Temporal executes this durably across days or weeks.
  An agent would re-reason about what step comes next on every invocation —
  unnecessary overhead and non-determinism for a known process.

LONG-RUNNING PROCESSES (hours, days, months)
  An agent session typically lives for one conversation (seconds to minutes).
  Temporal workflows live for as long as the business process requires.
  An employee onboarding workflow might run for 90 days.
  A subscription renewal workflow might sleep for 364 days then wake up.
  No agent framework is designed for this.

HUMAN-IN-THE-LOOP AT SCALE
  Send an approval request to a manager. Wait indefinitely for their response.
  When the manager clicks Approve in a UI, a Signal arrives.
  The workflow resumes. This works across days. Across server restarts.
  Across deployments. The manager approval is just a Signal.

GUARANTEED SIDE EFFECTS
  Temporal guarantees that Activities (which do external work) run
  at least once and can be configured for at-most-once with idempotency keys.
  Sending an email, charging a card, updating a database — Temporal ensures
  these happen eventually even across failures. An agent has no such guarantee.

VISIBILITY AND AUDIT
  Every workflow execution has a complete event history in the Temporal UI.
  You can see: every activity that ran, every retry, every signal received,
  every state transition, with timestamps.
  This is an inherent audit trail — valuable for compliance.

MASSIVE PARALLELISM
  Spawn 10,000 child workflows. Each runs independently.
  Process 10,000 loan applications in parallel, each with its own retry policy,
  each tracked individually. This is not something you model in an agent.


---
WHAT AGENTS ARE GREAT AT THAT TEMPORAL IS NOT
---

DYNAMIC DECISION MAKING
  "Given this document, decide which specialist to consult and what to ask."
  Temporal cannot do this. You cannot pre-write the decision in code
  if the decision depends on the content of the document.
  An agent using an LLM makes this decision at runtime.

OPEN-ENDED REASONING
  "Research this topic, read relevant pages, summarize findings, and suggest
  next steps." The set of steps is not known in advance.
  The agent figures out the steps as it goes.
  Temporal requires you to define all steps before execution.

NATURAL LANGUAGE UNDERSTANDING
  Temporal has no language model. It cannot parse, interpret, or respond
  to natural language. An agent is built on top of an LLM that does this.

ADAPTING TO INTERMEDIATE RESULTS
  If a tool returns an unexpected result, an agent reconsiders its plan.
  Temporal executes the next pre-defined step regardless of what the
  previous step returned (unless you write explicit branching logic).

CONVERSATIONAL INTERACTION
  An agent can have a back-and-forth conversation with a user across
  multiple turns, adapting to what the user says.
  Temporal workflows do not converse. They execute.


---
THE COMBINATION — AGENTS RUNNING INSIDE TEMPORAL
---

This is where the real production power is.

Pattern: use Temporal to give an agent durable execution, retry guarantees,
human approval gates, and long-running persistence — while the agent
retains its dynamic reasoning capability.

The agent's tool calls become Temporal Activities.
The agent's loop becomes a Temporal Workflow.

EXAMPLE: Loan Processing Agent on Temporal

  @workflow.defn
  class LoanProcessingWorkflow:
      @workflow.run
      async def run(self, application_id: str) -> str:

          # Step 1: Agent decides what documents to collect
          # This is an Activity that calls an LLM agent
          docs_needed = await workflow.execute_activity(
              agent_decide_documents,
              application_id,
              start_to_close_timeout=timedelta(minutes=5),
          )

          # Step 2: Collect documents (durable, retried if it fails)
          documents = await workflow.execute_activity(
              collect_documents,
              docs_needed,
              retry_policy=RetryPolicy(maximum_attempts=10),
              start_to_close_timeout=timedelta(hours=48),
          )

          # Step 3: Agent analyzes documents and generates assessment
          assessment = await workflow.execute_activity(
              agent_analyze_documents,
              documents,
              start_to_close_timeout=timedelta(minutes=10),
          )

          # Step 4: Wait for human underwriter approval (could be days)
          approval = await workflow.wait_condition(
              lambda: self._approval_received,
              timeout=timedelta(days=30),
          )

          # Step 5: Agent drafts the approval letter
          letter = await workflow.execute_activity(
              agent_draft_letter,
              assessment,
              approval,
              start_to_close_timeout=timedelta(minutes=5),
          )

          # Step 6: Disburse funds (at-most-once with idempotency key)
          await workflow.execute_activity(
              disburse_funds,
              application_id,
              start_to_close_timeout=timedelta(minutes=2),
          )

          return letter

      @workflow.signal
      def underwriter_approved(self, decision: str):
          self._approval_received = True
          self._decision = decision

What Temporal provides:
  - If the server crashes during document collection, it retries automatically
  - The 30-day wait for underwriter approval is a durable timer — no polling loop
  - Every step has configurable retry policy
  - The complete audit trail is visible in Temporal UI
  - The workflow can run for 30+ days without any process staying alive

What the agent provides:
  - agent_decide_documents: LLM reasons about what to collect
  - agent_analyze_documents: LLM interprets the documents
  - agent_draft_letter: LLM writes the approval letter
  - Dynamic content, natural language, adaptive reasoning

Neither can do what the other does. Together they cover the full spectrum.


EXAMPLE: Multi-Agent Pipeline on Temporal

  @workflow.defn
  class MultiAgentResearchWorkflow:
      @workflow.run
      async def run(self, query: str) -> str:

          # Agent 1: Classify query and decide research strategy
          strategy = await workflow.execute_activity(
              supervisor_agent_classify,
              query,
              start_to_close_timeout=timedelta(minutes=2),
          )

          # Fan out to specialist agents in parallel (child workflows)
          results = await asyncio.gather(*[
              workflow.execute_child_workflow(
                  SpecialistAgentWorkflow,
                  args=[query, domain],
              )
              for domain in strategy.domains
          ])

          # Aggregator agent merges results
          final = await workflow.execute_activity(
              aggregator_agent_merge,
              results,
              start_to_close_timeout=timedelta(minutes=3),
          )

          return final

  Each child workflow (SpecialistAgentWorkflow) is independently durable.
  If one specialist agent fails mid-execution, only that child retries.
  The supervisor workflow tracks all child workflows.
  This is the supervisor pattern with Temporal's durability guarantees.


---
TEMPORAL vs OTHER WORKFLOW TOOLS
---

Tool                What it is                    Agent-compatible?
----------------    --------------------------    -------------------
Temporal            Durable workflow engine       Yes (Activities wrap agents)
Apache Airflow      Batch DAG scheduler           Partial (DAGs are static)
AWS Step Functions  Managed state machine         Yes (Lambda Activities can run agents)
Prefect             Dataflow orchestration        Partial (Python-native, less durable)
Dagster             Data pipeline orchestrator    Partial (assets/ops model)
LangGraph           Agent graph framework         Yes (it IS an agent framework)
CrewAI              Multi-agent framework         Yes (it IS an agent framework)
Google ADK          Agent Development Kit         Yes (it IS an agent framework)
n8n / Zapier        No-code workflow automation   No (not designed for code-level agents)

Temporal vs AWS Step Functions:
  Step Functions: managed by AWS, JSON/YAML state machine definition,
  good for simple linear flows and Lambda orchestration.
  Temporal: code-first (Python/Go/Java), more expressive, supports complex
  patterns (dynamic fan-out, signals, long timers, sagas) naturally.
  Temporal requires running a server (or Temporal Cloud). Step Functions is serverless.

Temporal vs Airflow:
  Airflow: batch job scheduler, DAGs defined in Python, runs at scheduled intervals.
  Not designed for event-driven, long-running, or human-in-the-loop workflows.
  Temporal: event-driven, runs continuously, designed for millisecond to
  multi-month durations, human signals, dynamic fan-out.


---
WHEN TO USE TEMPORAL WITH AGENTS
---

Use Temporal when your agent-based system has any of:

  Long-running steps
    Any step that can take hours or more (waiting for a human,
    waiting for an external process, retrying a flaky external API).

  Human-in-the-loop approvals
    A manager must approve before the next step runs.
    The approval could come minutes or days later.
    Temporal's signal mechanism handles this natively.

  Guaranteed side effects
    Payments, database writes, external API mutations that must
    eventually happen exactly once despite failures.

  Cross-service orchestration
    Multiple services are involved and you need coordination,
    compensation (saga), and visibility across all of them.

  Regulatory audit trail
    You need an immutable, queryable record of every step
    every workflow ever took. Temporal's event history is this.

  Complex retry logic per step
    Each step has different retry requirements:
    LLM call: retry 3 times with 1s backoff.
    Payment API: retry 5 times with exponential backoff.
    Human approval: wait up to 30 days.
    Temporal configures this per Activity.

Do not use Temporal when:
  - Your agent interaction is a single short conversation (seconds).
  - All steps are fast, stateless, and in-process.
  - You do not need durability across failures.
  - Adding Temporal's operational overhead is not justified
    (you must run the Temporal server or pay for Temporal Cloud).


---
KEY INTERVIEW POINTS
---

Q: Is Temporal an agent?
   No. Temporal is a durable workflow engine. It has no reasoning capability.
   It executes a sequence of steps defined in your code, with automatic
   retry, durability across failures, and long-running timer support.
   An agent uses an LLM to decide what to do next at runtime.
   Temporal executes what you told it to do, reliably.

Q: What problem does Temporal solve that a message queue does not?
   A message queue gives you async delivery. But it does not give you:
   workflow state across steps, automatic retry with configurable backoff,
   durable timers (sleep for 30 days), human approval gates via signals,
   or a complete audit history of every step. You would have to build all
   of that yourself on top of a queue. Temporal gives it to you as infrastructure.

Q: How do you combine an LLM agent with Temporal?
   The agent's tool calls become Temporal Activities. The overall process
   (collect input, run agent, wait for human, run agent again, write result)
   becomes a Temporal Workflow. Temporal provides durability and retries.
   The agent provides reasoning and natural language capability.
   Neither replaces the other.

Q: What is the key Temporal concept for human-in-the-loop?
   Signals. A running workflow calls workflow.wait_condition() and pauses.
   When a human completes an action (clicks Approve, submits a form, replies
   to an email), your system sends a Signal to the workflow.
   The workflow resumes from exactly where it paused.
   This works across days. Across server restarts. No polling loop required.

Q: What is a Temporal Activity?
   A plain function that does the actual work: call an API, query a database,
   call an LLM. Activities are retried automatically on failure according
   to the retry policy you configure (max_attempts, backoff, timeout).
   They are where all non-deterministic and side-effectful code lives.
   The Workflow function itself must be deterministic and contain no I/O.

Q: When would you use Temporal over AWS Step Functions?
   Temporal is code-first (Python, Go, Java) and better at complex patterns:
   dynamic fan-out (spawn N child workflows based on runtime data),
   long-duration timers (sleep months), signals (external events resume workflows),
   and sagas (compensating transactions). Step Functions uses JSON/YAML state
   machine definitions, is serverless on AWS, and is simpler to operate for
   straightforward linear flows. Choose Temporal when your workflow logic
   is complex and your team prefers code over configuration.
